EPO multiple alignment
======================


Overall pipeline summary
------------------------

The EPO pipeline can be divided into 3 parts, all described in this
document:

1. Generating the anchors for constructing the graph. The anchors consist of 
   two or more sequences which are generated from pairwise whole-genome alignments 
   (eg. BLASTZ/LASTZ or tBLAT alignments).
2. Once the anchors are generated these can be mapped to the target genomes 
   (we use exonerate to do this).
3. The positions where the anchors map are then dumped to file and used as an 
   input to the program Enredo, which generates a graph representation of the "syntenic"
   regions shared by the target genomes. The syntenic regions from enredo are loaded 
   into a database and finally the these are aligned using ortheus 
   (which also generates ancestral sequences).


All the scripts are located relative to $ENSEMBL_CVS_ROOT_DIR (location of the GIT checkout).
You will need the following software components for all 3 parts of the pipeline:

* MySQL 5.1             (or higher)
* Perl 5.6              (or higher)
* Perl DBI API 1.6      (or higher)

EnsEMBL and BioPerl software:

:bioperl-live:           BioPerl 1.2.3
:ensembl:                Core API on which the rest of ensembl APIs are based
:ensembl-compara:        Compara API (data objects, db adaptors, pipeline runnables, pipeline configuration)
:ensembl-analysis:       Some of the pipeline runnables live here
:ensembl-hive:           The system to run pipelines


Generating the anchor sequences from a list of pairwise alignments
------------------------------------------------------------------

The configuration parameters for the pipeline are contained in the Perl module:
``$ENSEMBL_CVS_ROOT_DIR/ensembl-compara/modules/Bio/EnsEMBL/Compara/PipeConfig/EPO_pt1_conf.pm``

General description of the pipeline
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The pipeline uses pre-existing pairwise alignments (LASTZ or tBLAT) between a set of species and a reference species. The pairwise alignments
are present in a single database ('compara_pairwise_db'). It uses the coordinate system of the reference genome in each of the pairwise alignments
to find regions of overlap between all the species in the set. The reference genome is first chunked into convenient sized fragments ('chunk_size')
and overlaps are found on these chunks, these overlaps are aligned with Pecan and constrained elements are generated from these alignments with Gerp.
The constrained elements are transfered to the anchor_align table (these are the raw anchor set with a default mlss_id=20) which are then cleaned up 
and trimmed to a particular size range ito form the final anchor set(default mlss_id=10000).

see diagram :
``$ENSEMBL_CVS_ROOT_DIR/ensembl-compara/docs/pipelines/diagrams/epo_pt1.png``

Necessary software components and databases
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You will need 1 pre-existing compara database containing all the pairwise alignments, and the associated core dbs containing the sequences (set in 'core_db_urls')

You will also need to install the following executables and set their locations:

- `Gerp <http://mendel.stanford.edu/SidowLab/downloads/gerp/index.html>`_ set in ``gerp_exe_dir``
- `Pecan <http://hgwdev.cse.ucsc.edu/~benedict/code/Pecan.html>`_ set in ``jar_file`` in ``Bio::EnsEMBL::Compara::RunnableDB::MercatorPecan::Pecan``

Configuration of the pipeline
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

::

    init_pipeline.pl Bio::EnsEMBL::Compara::PipeConfig::EPO_pt1_conf.pm

and then run the beekeeper.pl (see :doc:`beekeeper`)


Mapping the anchor sequences from a set of genomes
--------------------------------------------------

The configuration parameters for the pipeline are contained in the Perl module:
``$ENSEMBL_CVS_ROOT_DIR/ensembl-compara/modules/Bio/EnsEMBL/Compara/PipeConfig/EPO_pt2_conf.pm``

General description of the pipeline
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The pipeline maps the anchors generated from the previous pipeline (1st part) to a set of target genomes (these genomes will need to be phylogenetically close
to the set of species from which the anchors were generated). We use exonerate to do the mapping. After mapping, overlapping mapped anchors are removed, so that 
no mapped position is associated with more than one anchor (this is necessary for the graph generated by Enredo (3rd part)). Finally the mapping positions are 
reduced (trimmed) to a 2 base pair position on the target genome.

see diagram :
``$ENSEMBL_CVS_ROOT_DIR/ensembl-compara/docs/pipelines/diagrams/epo_pt2.png``

Necessary software components and databases
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You will need the database containing the anchor set from the 1st part (set in 'compara_anchor_db') and the associated core dbs containing the target genomes (set in 'core_db_urls').
 
You will also need to install the following executables and set their locations:

- `exonerate <http://www.ebi.ac.uk/~guy/exonerate/>`_ set in ``mapping_exe``

Configuration of the pipeline
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

::

    init_pipeline.pl Bio::EnsEMBL::Compara::PipeConfig::EPO_pt2_conf.pm

and then run the beekeeper.pl (see :doc:`beekeeper`)


Generating the multiple sequence alignments from the mapped anchor positions
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The configuration parameters for the pipeline are contained in the Perl module:
``$ENSEMBL_CVS_ROOT_DIR/ensembl-compara/modules/Bio/EnsEMBL/Compara/PipeConfig/EPO_pt3_conf.pm``

General description of the pipeline
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
The pipeline sets up an ancestral database to store the predicted ancestral genome sequences ('ancestral_db').
The nesessary tables (genome_db, dnafrags, method_link etc.) are set up using data from the compara_master and core databases.
Mapping information is dumped from the 'compara_mapped_anchor_db' database to file and enredo is run using this file as input ('enredo_mapping_file_name').
Enredo generates a graph representation of the "syntenic" regions shared by the mapped genomes and writes this graph to file ('enredo_output_file_name').
The syntenic regions from enredo are loaded into the pipeline database (into the dnafrag_region and synteny_region tables).
These loaded syntenic regions are aligned using ortheus (which also generates ancestral sequences). The alignments are added to the genomic_align, 
genomic_align_block and genomic_align_tree tables. Ancestral sequences are added to the dna and seq_region tables in the ancestral database and corresponding
entries are added to the dnafrag table in the compara db (one entry per ancestral node in each alignment block).
Gerp is used to generate conservation scores and constrained elements from the alignments and are added to the appropriate tables in the compara db.

see diagram :
``$ENSEMBL_CVS_ROOT_DIR/ensembl-compara/docs/pipelines/diagrams/epo_pt3.png``

Necessary software components and databases
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You will need 2 pre-existing databases: 
The first database ('compara_mapped_anchor_db') will hold the data for the anchor set mapped to the various genomes.
The second database databases ('compara_master') will hold general information regarding the dnafrags, genome_dbs, method_link_ids, 
method_link_species_set_ids etc. used.

You will also need to define the location of the databases containing the species assemblies ('main_core_dbs' and/or 'additional_core_db_urls') 
the sequence from which will be use to generate the MSA.

You will also need to install the following executables and set their locations:

- bl2seq (from NCBI), set in the ``bl2seq``
- gerpcol and gerpelem (`download link <http://mendel.stanford.edu/SidowLab/downloads/gerp/>`_) set in ``gerp_exe_dir``
- `Pecan <http://hgwdev.cse.ucsc.edu/~benedict/code/Pecan.html>`_ set in ``jar_file``
- `Enredo <https://github.com/jherrero/enredo>`_ set in ``enredo_bin_dir``
- `Ortheus <http://hgwdev.cse.ucsc.edu/~benedict/code/Ortheus.html>`_

Configuration of the pipeline
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

::

    init_pipeline.pl Bio::EnsEMBL::Compara::PipeConfig::EPO_pt3_conf.pm

Before running beekeeper.pl, please include this line on your .bashrc:

.. code-block:: bash

    export PYTHONPATH=/software/ensembl/compara/OrtheusC/src/python/

and then run the beekeeper.pl (see :doc:`beekeeper`)

